README.md, before:

# MySQLOO 9 - Enhanced Edition
An enhanced, secure, and robust object-oriented MySQL module for Garry's Mod.

This module is an improved version of MySQLOO 9, featuring critical security fixes, code quality improvements, and enhanced reliability. It supports multiple result sets, prepared queries, and transactions with improved exception handling, input validation, and defensive programming practices.

## What's New in This Version

### Security Enhancements
- **Integer Overflow Protection**: Added comprehensive overflow checks in string escaping and buffer allocation to prevent potential security vulnerabilities
- **NULL Pointer Protection**: Added defensive NULL checks for MySQL API calls to prevent crashes
- **Type Safety Improvements**: Fixed type mismatches to prevent data truncation issues
- **Input Validation**: Enhanced validation for Lua interface parameters (index bounds, string length limits)

### Reliability Improvements
- **Exception Handling**: Fixed exception inheritance hierarchy for proper exception handling and polymorphism
- **Retry Logic**: Replaced recursive retry mechanism with iterative loop to prevent stack overflow
- **Race Condition Fixes**: Improved error handling and resource cleanup in edge cases
- **Better Error Recovery**: Enhanced reconnection logic with proper error checking

### Code Quality
- **Modern C++ Practices**: Replaced `new` with `make_shared` where applicable for better exception safety and performance
- **Const Correctness**: Added const qualifiers to appropriate methods for better API design
- **Defensive Programming**: Added extensive bounds checking and validation throughout the codebase

### What Was Fixed
- Fixed MySQLOOException to properly inherit from std::exception and implement what() method
- Prevented potential stack overflow in query retry logic
- Added protection against integer overflow in string escaping operations
- Improved buffer allocation safety with overflow checks
- Enhanced error handling in prepared query result storage
- Better input validation for prepared query parameters

# Installation

## Building from Source
This enhanced version should be built from source using the instructions in the Build Instructions section below. The build process will automatically download dependencies using vcpkg.

## Binary Distribution
If you have pre-built binaries, place the DLL file appropriate for your server's operating system and architecture within the `garrysmod/lua/bin/` folder on your server. If the `bin` folder doesn't exist, please create it.

**Note**: Due to the security and reliability improvements in this version, we recommend building from source to ensure you have the latest fixes.

### Notes
* **If your server is using Windows**, you will need to install vcredist 2019, 2015, possibly 2008 and others for the module to load correctly. You can download them [here](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/2977003/the-latest-supported-visual-c-downloads).
For the 32-bit version of the module you will need the x86 redistributable, and for the 64 bit version the x64 redistributable.
* If you're unsure of your server's operating system and architecture, type `lua_run print(jit.os, jit.arch)` into the server's console to find out. The output will be something similar to `Windows x86` (x86 is 32-bit, x64 is 64-bit).
* Previously you were required to place libmysqlclient.dll besides your srcds executable. This is not required anymore since MySQLOO now links statically against libmysqlclient.

# Documentation


```LUA

-- mysqloo table

mysqloo.connect( host, username, password, database [, port, socket] )
-- returns [Database]
-- Initializes the database object, note that this does not actually connect to the database.

mysqloo.VERSION -- [String] Current MySQLOO version (currently "9")
mysqloo.MINOR_VERSION -- [String] minor version of this library

mysqloo.DATABASE_CONNECTED -- [Number] - Database is connected
mysqloo.DATABASE_NOT_CONNECTED -- [Number] - Database is not connected
mysqloo.DATABASE_INTERNAL_ERROR -- [Number] - Internal error

mysqloo.QUERY_NOT_RUNNING -- [Number] - Query not running
mysqloo.QUERY_WAITING -- [Number] - Query is queued/started
mysqloo.QUERY_RUNNING -- [Number] - Query is being processed (on the database server)
mysqloo.QUERY_COMPLETE -- [Number] - Query is complete
mysqloo.QUERY_ABORTED -- [Number] - Query was aborted

mysqloo.OPTION_NUMERIC_FIELDS -- [Number] - Instead of rows being key value pairs, this makes them just be an array of values
mysqloo.OPTION_NAMED_FIELDS -- [Number] - Not used anymore
mysqloo.OPTION_INTERPRET_DATA -- [Number] - Not used anymore
mysqloo.OPTION_CACHE -- [Number] - Not used anymore

-- Database object

-- Functions
Database:connect()
-- Returns nothing
-- Connects to the database (non blocking)
-- This function calls the onConnected or onConnectionFailed callback

Database:disconnect(shouldWait)
-- Returns nothing
-- disconnects from the database and waits for all queries to finish if shouldWait is true
-- This function calls the onDisconnected callback if it existed on the database before the database was connected.

Database:query( sql )
-- Returns [Query]
-- Initializes a query to the database, [String] sql is the SQL query to run.

Database:prepare( sql )
-- Returns [PreparedQuery]
-- Creates a prepared query associated with the database

Database:createTransaction()
-- Returns [Transaction]
-- Creates a transaction that executes multiple statements atomically
-- Check [url]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID[/url] for more information

Database:escape( str )
-- Returns [String]
-- Escapes [String] str so that it is safe to use in a query.
-- If the characterset of the database is changed after connecting, this might not work properly anymore
-- Enhanced: Now includes overflow protection for extremely large strings

Database:abortAllQueries()
-- Returns the amount of queries aborted successfully
-- Aborts all waiting (QUERY_WAITING) queries

Database:status()
-- Returns [Number] (mysqloo.DATABASE_* enums)
-- Checks the connection to the database
-- This shouldn't be used to detect timeouts to the server anymore (it's not possible anymore)

Database:setAutoReconnect(shouldReconnect)
-- Returns nothing
-- The autoreconnect feature of mysqloo can be disabled if this function is called with shouldReconnect = false
-- This may only be called before Database:connect()

Database:setMultiStatements(useMultiStatemets)
-- Returns nothing
-- Multi statements ("SELECT 1; SELECT 2;") can be disabled if this function is called with useMultiStatemets = false
-- This may only be called before Database:connect()

Database:setCachePreparedStatements(cachePreparedStatements)
-- Returns nothing
-- This will disable all caching of prepared query handles
-- which will reduce the performance of prepared queries that are being reused
-- Set this to true if you run into the prepared query limit imposed by the server

Database:wait()
-- Returns nothing
-- Forces the server to wait for the connection to finish. (might cause deadlocks)
-- This may only be called after Database:connect()

Database:serverVersion()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the MySQL servers version

Database:serverInfo()
-- Returns [String]
-- Fancy string of the MySQL servers version

Database:hostInfo()
-- Returns [String]
-- Gets information about the connection.

Database:queueSize()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the amount of queries waiting to be processed

Database:ping()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Actively checks if the database connection is still up and attempts to reconnect if it is down
-- This will freeze your server for at least 2 times the pingtime to
-- the database server if the connection is down
-- returns true if the connection is still up, false otherwise

Database:setCharacterSet(charSetName)
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Attempts to set the connection's character set to the one specified.
-- Please note that this does block the main server thread if there is a query currently being ran
-- Returns true on success, false on failure

Database:setSSLSettings(key, cert, ca, capath, cipher)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the SSL configuration of the database object. This allows you to enable secure connections over the internet using TLS.
-- Every parameter is optional and can be omitted (set to nil) if not required.
-- See https://dev.mysql.com/doc/c-api/8.0/en/mysql-ssl-set.html for the description of each parameter.

Database:setReadTimeout(timeout)
Database:setWriteTimeout(timeout)
Database:setConnectTimeout(timeout)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the corresponding timeout value in seconds for any queries operations started by this database instance.
-- The timeout value needs to be at least 1. If this is not called, the default value is used.
-- For information about the timeout values read the documentation here:
-- https://dev.mysql.com/doc/c-api/8.0/en/mysql-options.html

-- Callbacks
Database.onConnected( db )
-- Called when the connection to the MySQL server is successful

Database.onConnectionFailed( db, err )
-- Called when the connection to the MySQL server fails, [String] err is why.

Database.onDisconnected( db )
-- Called after Database.disconnect has been called and all queries have finished executing
-- Note: You have to set this callback before calling Database:connect() or it will not be called.


-- Query/PreparedQuery object (transactions also inherit all functions, some have no effect though)

-- Functions
Query:start()
-- Returns nothing
-- Starts the query.

Query:isRunning()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- True if the query is running or waiting, false if it isn't.

Query:getData()
-- Returns [Table]
-- Gets the data the query returned from the server
-- Format: { row1, row2, row3, ... }
-- Row format: { field_name = field_value } or {first_field, second_field, ...} if OPTION_NUMERIC_FIELDS is enabled

Query:abort()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Attempts to abort the query if it is still in the state QUERY_WAITING
-- Returns true if at least one running instance of the query was aborted successfully, false otherwise

Query:lastInsert()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the autoincrement index of the last inserted row of the current result set

Query:affectedRows()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the number of rows the query has affected (of the current result set)

Query:setOption( option )
-- Returns nothing
-- Changes how the query returns data (mysqloo.OPTION_* enums).

Query:wait(shouldSwap)
-- Returns nothing
-- Forces the server to wait for the query to finish.
-- This should only ever be used if it is really necessary, since it can cause lag and
-- If shouldSwap is true, the query is being swapped to the front of the queue
-- making it the next query to be executed


Query:error()
-- Returns [String]
-- Gets the error caused by the query, or "" if there was no error.

Query:hasMoreResults()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Returns true if the query still has more data associated with it (which means getNextResults() can be called)
-- Note: This function works unfortunately different that one would expect.
-- hasMoreResults() returns true if there is currently a result that can be popped, rather than if there is an
-- additional result that has data. However, this does make for a nicer code that handles multiple results.
-- See Examples/multi_results.lua for an example how to use it.

Query:getNextResults()
-- Returns [Table]
-- Pops the current result set, chaning the results of lastInsert() and affectedRows()  and getData()
-- to those of the next result set. Returns the rows of the next result set in the same format as getData()
-- Throws an error if attempted to be called when there is no result set left to be popped

-- Callbacks
-- ALWAYS set these callbacks before you start the query or you might run into issues

Query.onAborted( q )
-- Called when the query is aborted.

Query.onError( q, err, sql )
-- Called when the query errors, [String] err is the error and [String] sql is the SQL query that caused it.

Query.onSuccess( q, data )
-- Called when the query is successful, [Table] data is the data the query returned.

Query.onData( q, data )
-- Called when the query retrieves a row of data, [Table] data is the row.


-- PreparedQuery object
-- A prepared query uses a prepared statement that, instead of having the actual values of
-- new rows, etc. in the query itself, it uses parameters, that can be set using the appropriate methods
-- PreparedStatements make sql injections pretty much impossible since the data is sent seperately from the parameterized query
-- Prepared queries also make it easy to reuse one query several times to insert/update/delete multiple rows
-- An example of a parameterized query would be "INSERT INTO users (`steamid`, `nick`) VALUES(?,?)"
-- A few types of queries might not work with prepared statements
-- For more information about prepared statements you can read here: [url]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prepared_statement[/url]

PreparedQuery:setNumber(index, number)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be of type double with value number
-- Enhanced: Validates index is within valid range (1 to UINT_MAX)

PreparedQuery:setString(index, str)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be of type string with value str
-- Note: str should not!! be escaped
-- Enhanced: Validates index range and string length limits to prevent buffer issues

PreparedQuery:setBoolean(index, bool)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be of type boolean with value bool
-- Enhanced: Validates index is within valid range

PreparedQuery:setNull(index)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be NULL
-- Enhanced: Validates index is within valid range

PreparedQuery:clearParameters()
-- Returns nothing
-- Clears all currently set parameters inside the prepared statement.

PreparedQuery:putNewParameters()
-- Returns nothing
-- Deprecated: Start the same prepared statement multiple times instead


-- Transaction object
-- Transactions are used to group several seperate queries or prepared queries together.
-- Either all queries in the transaction are executed successfully or none of them are.
-- Please note that single queries are already transactions by themselves so it usually only makes sense to have transactions
-- with at least two queries.
-- Since mysqloo works async, much of the power of transactions (such as manually rolling back a transaction) cannot be used properly, but
-- there's still many areas they can be useful.
-- Important note: Callbacks of individual queries that are part of the transactions are not run (both in error and successful case). Use the callbacks of the transaction instead.

Transaction:addQuery(query)
-- Adds a query to the transaction. The callbacks of the added queries will not be called.
-- query can be either a PreparedQuery or a regular Query

Transaction:getQueries()
-- Returns all queries that have been added to this transaction.

-- Callbacks

Transaction.onError(tr, err)
-- Called when any of the queries caused an error, no queries will have had any effect

Transaction.onSuccess()
--  Called when all queries in the transaction have been executed successfully

```

# Build Instructions

This project uses [CMake](https://cmake.org/) as a build system and vcpkg for dependency management.

## Prerequisites

- **CMake** 3.10 or higher ([Download](https://cmake.org/download/))
- **C++ Compiler** with C++14 support:
  - Windows: Visual Studio 2019 or later (with C++ workload)
  - Linux: GCC 7+ or Clang 5+
- **Git** (for vcpkg dependency management)
- **Ninja** build generator (usually comes with CMake or install separately)

The build scripts will automatically download and set up vcpkg, so you don't need to install dependencies manually.

## Windows

### Quick Build (Recommended)
Use the provided PowerShell build script:

```powershell
.\build.ps1
```

This will:
- Auto-detect your architecture (32-bit or 64-bit)
- Download and set up vcpkg automatically
- Configure and build the project
- Output the DLL to `cmake-build-x64-release\` (for 64-bit) or `cmake-build-x86-release\` (for 32-bit)

You can also specify a preset explicitly:
```powershell
.\build.ps1 -Preset windows-x64-release
.\build.ps1 -Preset windows-x86-release
```

### Visual Studio
Visual Studio has built-in support for CMake projects. After opening the project, you should be able to select from the presets defined in the `CMakePresets.json` file.

After selecting a preset, Visual Studio should automatically download the required dependencies using vcpkg.

To build the project, run `Build > Build All` from the toolbar. The output files are placed in the `cmake-build-*-release/` directory.

### CLion
Before opening the project in CLion, ensure that you have a [valid toolchain](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/clion/how-to-create-toolchain-in-clion.html) set up.

After opening the project in CLion, you should get a dialog showing you the available presets.
Select the preset for 32- or 64-bit (depending on which you want to build) and press the duplicate button.
Then, in the options for your new preset, select the correct toolchain (again, either 32- or 64-bit) and select to
explicitly use `Ninja` as the generator.
After applying and setting it as the active preset, you can build the project using `Build > Build Project` in the toolbar.

The output files are placed within the `cmake-build-*-release/` directory of this project.

## Linux

### Prerequisites
Install the required build tools. For example, on Ubuntu/Debian:
```bash
sudo apt install build-essential gcc-multilib g++-multilib cmake ninja-build git pkg-config
```

### Quick Build
Use the provided build script:

```bash
./build.sh linux-x64-release  # For 64-bit
./build.sh linux-x86-release  # For 32-bit
```

The script will:
- Download and set up vcpkg in your home directory (if not already present)
- Configure the build with CMake
- Build the project
- Output the DLL to `cmake-build-*-release/` directory

> [!NOTE]
> The script downloads vcpkg to `~/vcpkg` by default. You can modify the script if you prefer a different location.



## Mac
Mac is currently not officially supported, but you may be able to build it using similar instructions as for Linux. Note that you'll need to ensure all dependencies are available via Homebrew or MacPorts.

---

## Technical Details

### Security Improvements Summary
- All string operations now include overflow protection
- MySQL API calls have defensive NULL pointer checks
- Input validation prevents invalid parameters from causing crashes
- Exception handling follows modern C++ best practices

### Performance
- Optimized memory allocation using `make_shared` where possible
- Vector capacity reservation for known sizes
- Const correctness enables compiler optimizations

### Compatibility
This version maintains full backward compatibility with the original MySQLOO 9 API. All existing code should work without modification while benefiting from the improved security and reliability.

Commit message:

Enhance project configuration and documentation: updated .gitignore for build artifacts, modified CMake presets for user-specific paths, added troubleshooting section in README, and improved thread safety in BlockingQueue and Database classes.

README.md, after:

# MySQLOO 9 - Enhanced Edition
An enhanced, secure, and robust object-oriented MySQL module for Garry's Mod.

This module is an improved version of MySQLOO 9, featuring critical security fixes, code quality improvements, and enhanced reliability. It supports multiple result sets, prepared queries, and transactions with improved exception handling, input validation, and defensive programming practices.

## What's New in This Version

### Security Enhancements
- **Integer Overflow Protection**: Added comprehensive overflow checks in string escaping and buffer allocation to prevent potential security vulnerabilities
- **NULL Pointer Protection**: Added defensive NULL checks for MySQL API calls to prevent crashes
- **Type Safety Improvements**: Fixed type mismatches to prevent data truncation issues
- **Input Validation**: Enhanced validation for Lua interface parameters (index bounds, string length limits)

### Reliability Improvements
- **Exception Handling**: Fixed exception inheritance hierarchy for proper exception handling and polymorphism
- **Retry Logic**: Replaced recursive retry mechanism with iterative loop to prevent stack overflow
- **Race Condition Fixes**: Improved error handling and resource cleanup in edge cases
- **Better Error Recovery**: Enhanced reconnection logic with proper error checking

### Code Quality
- **Modern C++ Practices**: Replaced `new` with `make_shared` where applicable for better exception safety and performance
- **Const Correctness**: Added const qualifiers to appropriate methods for better API design
- **Defensive Programming**: Added extensive bounds checking and validation throughout the codebase

### What Was Fixed
- Fixed MySQLOOException to properly inherit from std::exception and implement what() method
- Prevented potential stack overflow in query retry logic
- Added protection against integer overflow in string escaping operations
- Improved buffer allocation safety with overflow checks
- Enhanced error handling in prepared query result storage
- Better input validation for prepared query parameters

# Installation

## Building from Source
This enhanced version should be built from source using the instructions in the Build Instructions section below. The build process will automatically download dependencies using vcpkg.

## Binary Distribution
If you have pre-built binaries, place the DLL file appropriate for your server's operating system and architecture within the `garrysmod/lua/bin/` folder on your server. If the `bin` folder doesn't exist, please create it.

**Note**: Due to the security and reliability improvements in this version, we recommend building from source to ensure you have the latest fixes.

### Notes
* **If your server is using Windows**, you will need to install vcredist 2019, 2015, possibly 2008 and others for the module to load correctly. You can download them [here](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/2977003/the-latest-supported-visual-c-downloads).
For the 32-bit version of the module you will need the x86 redistributable, and for the 64 bit version the x64 redistributable.
* If you're unsure of your server's operating system and architecture, type `lua_run print(jit.os, jit.arch)` into the server's console to find out. The output will be something similar to `Windows x86` (x86 is 32-bit, x64 is 64-bit).
* Previously you were required to place libmysqlclient.dll besides your srcds executable. This is not required anymore since MySQLOO now links statically against libmysqlclient.

# Documentation


```LUA

-- mysqloo table

mysqloo.connect( host, username, password, database [, port, socket] )
-- returns [Database]
-- Initializes the database object, note that this does not actually connect to the database.

mysqloo.VERSION -- [String] Current MySQLOO version (currently "9")
mysqloo.MINOR_VERSION -- [String] minor version of this library

mysqloo.DATABASE_CONNECTED -- [Number] - Database is connected
mysqloo.DATABASE_NOT_CONNECTED -- [Number] - Database is not connected
mysqloo.DATABASE_INTERNAL_ERROR -- [Number] - Internal error

mysqloo.QUERY_NOT_RUNNING -- [Number] - Query not running
mysqloo.QUERY_WAITING -- [Number] - Query is queued/started
mysqloo.QUERY_RUNNING -- [Number] - Query is being processed (on the database server)
mysqloo.QUERY_COMPLETE -- [Number] - Query is complete
mysqloo.QUERY_ABORTED -- [Number] - Query was aborted

mysqloo.OPTION_NUMERIC_FIELDS -- [Number] - Instead of rows being key value pairs, this makes them just be an array of values
mysqloo.OPTION_NAMED_FIELDS -- [Number] - Not used anymore
mysqloo.OPTION_INTERPRET_DATA -- [Number] - Not used anymore
mysqloo.OPTION_CACHE -- [Number] - Not used anymore

-- Database object

-- Functions
Database:connect()
-- Returns nothing
-- Connects to the database (non blocking)
-- This function calls the onConnected or onConnectionFailed callback

Database:disconnect(shouldWait)
-- Returns nothing
-- disconnects from the database and waits for all queries to finish if shouldWait is true
-- This function calls the onDisconnected callback if it existed on the database before the database was connected.

Database:query( sql )
-- Returns [Query]
-- Initializes a query to the database, [String] sql is the SQL query to run.

Database:prepare( sql )
-- Returns [PreparedQuery]
-- Creates a prepared query associated with the database

Database:createTransaction()
-- Returns [Transaction]
-- Creates a transaction that executes multiple statements atomically
-- Check [url]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID[/url] for more information

Database:escape( str )
-- Returns [String]
-- Escapes [String] str so that it is safe to use in a query.
-- If the characterset of the database is changed after connecting, this might not work properly anymore
-- Enhanced: Now includes overflow protection for extremely large strings

Database:abortAllQueries()
-- Returns the amount of queries aborted successfully
-- Aborts all waiting (QUERY_WAITING) queries

Database:status()
-- Returns [Number] (mysqloo.DATABASE_* enums)
-- Checks the connection to the database
-- This shouldn't be used to detect timeouts to the server anymore (it's not possible anymore)

Database:setAutoReconnect(shouldReconnect)
-- Returns nothing
-- The autoreconnect feature of mysqloo can be disabled if this function is called with shouldReconnect = false
-- This may only be called before Database:connect()

Database:setMultiStatements(useMultiStatemets)
-- Returns nothing
-- Multi statements ("SELECT 1; SELECT 2;") can be disabled if this function is called with useMultiStatemets = false
-- This may only be called before Database:connect()

Database:setCachePreparedStatements(cachePreparedStatements)
-- Returns nothing
-- This will disable all caching of prepared query handles
-- which will reduce the performance of prepared queries that are being reused
-- Set this to true if you run into the prepared query limit imposed by the server

Database:wait()
-- Returns nothing
-- Forces the server to wait for the connection to finish. (might cause deadlocks)
-- This may only be called after Database:connect()

Database:serverVersion()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the MySQL servers version

Database:serverInfo()
-- Returns [String]
-- Fancy string of the MySQL servers version

Database:hostInfo()
-- Returns [String]
-- Gets information about the connection.

Database:queueSize()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the amount of queries waiting to be processed

Database:ping()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Actively checks if the database connection is still up and attempts to reconnect if it is down
-- This will freeze your server for at least 2 times the pingtime to
-- the database server if the connection is down
-- returns true if the connection is still up, false otherwise

Database:setCharacterSet(charSetName)
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Attempts to set the connection's character set to the one specified.
-- Please note that this does block the main server thread if there is a query currently being ran
-- Returns true on success, false on failure

Database:setSSLSettings(key, cert, ca, capath, cipher)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the SSL configuration of the database object. This allows you to enable secure connections over the internet using TLS.
-- Every parameter is optional and can be omitted (set to nil) if not required.
-- See https://dev.mysql.com/doc/c-api/8.0/en/mysql-ssl-set.html for the description of each parameter.

Database:setReadTimeout(timeout)
Database:setWriteTimeout(timeout)
Database:setConnectTimeout(timeout)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the corresponding timeout value in seconds for any queries operations started by this database instance.
-- The timeout value needs to be at least 1. If this is not called, the default value is used.
-- For information about the timeout values read the documentation here:
-- https://dev.mysql.com/doc/c-api/8.0/en/mysql-options.html

-- Callbacks
Database.onConnected( db )
-- Called when the connection to the MySQL server is successful

Database.onConnectionFailed( db, err )
-- Called when the connection to the MySQL server fails, [String] err is why.

Database.onDisconnected( db )
-- Called after Database.disconnect has been called and all queries have finished executing
-- Note: You have to set this callback before calling Database:connect() or it will not be called.


-- Query/PreparedQuery object (transactions also inherit all functions, some have no effect though)

-- Functions
Query:start()
-- Returns nothing
-- Starts the query.

Query:isRunning()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- True if the query is running or waiting, false if it isn't.

Query:getData()
-- Returns [Table]
-- Gets the data the query returned from the server
-- Format: { row1, row2, row3, ... }
-- Row format: { field_name = field_value } or {first_field, second_field, ...} if OPTION_NUMERIC_FIELDS is enabled

Query:abort()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Attempts to abort the query if it is still in the state QUERY_WAITING
-- Returns true if at least one running instance of the query was aborted successfully, false otherwise

Query:lastInsert()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the autoincrement index of the last inserted row of the current result set

Query:affectedRows()
-- Returns [Number]
-- Gets the number of rows the query has affected (of the current result set)

Query:setOption( option )
-- Returns nothing
-- Changes how the query returns data (mysqloo.OPTION_* enums).

Query:wait(shouldSwap)
-- Returns nothing
-- Forces the server to wait for the query to finish.
-- This should only ever be used if it is really necessary, since it can cause lag and
-- If shouldSwap is true, the query is being swapped to the front of the queue
-- making it the next query to be executed


Query:error()
-- Returns [String]
-- Gets the error caused by the query, or "" if there was no error.

Query:hasMoreResults()
-- Returns [Boolean]
-- Returns true if the query still has more data associated with it (which means getNextResults() can be called)
-- Note: This function works unfortunately different that one would expect.
-- hasMoreResults() returns true if there is currently a result that can be popped, rather than if there is an
-- additional result that has data. However, this does make for a nicer code that handles multiple results.
-- See Examples/multi_results.lua for an example how to use it.

Query:getNextResults()
-- Returns [Table]
-- Pops the current result set, chaning the results of lastInsert() and affectedRows()  and getData()
-- to those of the next result set. Returns the rows of the next result set in the same format as getData()
-- Throws an error if attempted to be called when there is no result set left to be popped

-- Callbacks
-- ALWAYS set these callbacks before you start the query or you might run into issues

Query.onAborted( q )
-- Called when the query is aborted.

Query.onError( q, err, sql )
-- Called when the query errors, [String] err is the error and [String] sql is the SQL query that caused it.

Query.onSuccess( q, data )
-- Called when the query is successful, [Table] data is the data the query returned.

Query.onData( q, data )
-- Called when the query retrieves a row of data, [Table] data is the row.


-- PreparedQuery object
-- A prepared query uses a prepared statement that, instead of having the actual values of
-- new rows, etc. in the query itself, it uses parameters, that can be set using the appropriate methods
-- PreparedStatements make sql injections pretty much impossible since the data is sent seperately from the parameterized query
-- Prepared queries also make it easy to reuse one query several times to insert/update/delete multiple rows
-- An example of a parameterized query would be "INSERT INTO users (`steamid`, `nick`) VALUES(?,?)"
-- A few types of queries might not work with prepared statements
-- For more information about prepared statements you can read here: [url]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prepared_statement[/url]

PreparedQuery:setNumber(index, number)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be of type double with value number
-- Enhanced: Validates index is within valid range (1 to UINT_MAX)

PreparedQuery:setString(index, str)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be of type string with value str
-- Note: str should not!! be escaped
-- Enhanced: Validates index range and string length limits to prevent buffer issues

PreparedQuery:setBoolean(index, bool)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be of type boolean with value bool
-- Enhanced: Validates index is within valid range

PreparedQuery:setNull(index)
-- Returns nothing
-- Sets the parameter at index (1-based) to be NULL
-- Enhanced: Validates index is within valid range

PreparedQuery:clearParameters()
-- Returns nothing
-- Clears all currently set parameters inside the prepared statement.

PreparedQuery:putNewParameters()
-- Returns nothing
-- Deprecated: Start the same prepared statement multiple times instead


-- Transaction object
-- Transactions are used to group several seperate queries or prepared queries together.
-- Either all queries in the transaction are executed successfully or none of them are.
-- Please note that single queries are already transactions by themselves so it usually only makes sense to have transactions
-- with at least two queries.
-- Since mysqloo works async, much of the power of transactions (such as manually rolling back a transaction) cannot be used properly, but
-- there's still many areas they can be useful.
-- Important note: Callbacks of individual queries that are part of the transactions are not run (both in error and successful case). Use the callbacks of the transaction instead.

Transaction:addQuery(query)
-- Adds a query to the transaction. The callbacks of the added queries will not be called.
-- query can be either a PreparedQuery or a regular Query

Transaction:getQueries()
-- Returns all queries that have been added to this transaction.

-- Callbacks

Transaction.onError(tr, err)
-- Called when any of the queries caused an error, no queries will have had any effect

Transaction.onSuccess()
--  Called when all queries in the transaction have been executed successfully

```

# Build Instructions

This project uses [CMake](https://cmake.org/) as a build system and vcpkg for dependency management.

## Prerequisites

- **CMake** 3.10 or higher ([Download](https://cmake.org/download/))
- **C++ Compiler** with C++14 support:
  - Windows: Visual Studio 2019 or later (with C++ workload)
  - Linux: GCC 7+ or Clang 5+
- **Git** (for vcpkg dependency management)
- **Ninja** build generator (usually comes with CMake or install separately)

The build scripts will automatically download and set up vcpkg, so you don't need to install dependencies manually.

## Windows

### Quick Build (Recommended)
Use the provided PowerShell build script:

```powershell
.\build.ps1
```

This will:
- Auto-detect your architecture (32-bit or 64-bit)
- Download and set up vcpkg automatically
- Configure and build the project
- Output the DLL to `cmake-build-x64-release\` (for 64-bit) or `cmake-build-x86-release\` (for 32-bit)

You can also specify a preset explicitly:
```powershell
.\build.ps1 -Preset windows-x64-release
.\build.ps1 -Preset windows-x86-release
```

### Visual Studio
Visual Studio has built-in support for CMake projects. After opening the project, you should be able to select from the presets defined in the `CMakePresets.json` file.

After selecting a preset, Visual Studio should automatically download the required dependencies using vcpkg.

To build the project, run `Build > Build All` from the toolbar. The output files are placed in the `cmake-build-*-release/` directory.

### CLion
Before opening the project in CLion, ensure that you have a [valid toolchain](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/clion/how-to-create-toolchain-in-clion.html) set up.

After opening the project in CLion, you should get a dialog showing you the available presets.
Select the preset for 32- or 64-bit (depending on which you want to build) and press the duplicate button.
Then, in the options for your new preset, select the correct toolchain (again, either 32- or 64-bit) and select to
explicitly use `Ninja` as the generator.
After applying and setting it as the active preset, you can build the project using `Build > Build Project` in the toolbar.

The output files are placed within the `cmake-build-*-release/` directory of this project.

## Linux

### Prerequisites
Install the required build tools. For example, on Ubuntu/Debian:
```bash
sudo apt install build-essential gcc-multilib g++-multilib cmake ninja-build git pkg-config
```

### Quick Build
Use the provided build script:

```bash
./build.sh linux-x64-release  # For 64-bit
./build.sh linux-x86-release  # For 32-bit
```

The script will:
- Download and set up vcpkg in your home directory (if not already present)
- Configure the build with CMake
- Build the project
- Output the DLL to `cmake-build-*-release/` directory

> [!NOTE]
> The script downloads vcpkg to `~/vcpkg` by default. You can modify the script if you prefer a different location.



## Mac
Mac is currently not officially supported, but you may be able to build it using similar instructions as for Linux. Note that you'll need to ensure all dependencies are available via Homebrew or MacPorts.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter build issues, see [TROUBLESHOOTING.md](TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common problems and solutions.

---

## Technical Details

### Security Improvements Summary
- All string operations now include overflow protection
- MySQL API calls have defensive NULL pointer checks
- Input validation prevents invalid parameters from causing crashes
- Exception handling follows modern C++ best practices

### Performance
- Optimized memory allocation using `make_shared` where possible
- Vector capacity reservation for known sizes
- Const correctness enables compiler optimizations

### Compatibility
This version maintains full backward compatibility with the original MySQLOO 9 API. All existing code should work without modification while benefiting from the improved security and reliability.
